README.md, before:

![Build Status](https://github.com/simpledotorg/simple-android/workflows/CI/badge.svg)
[![pullreminders](https://pullreminders.com/badge.svg)](https://pullreminders.com?ref=badge)

# Simple

An Android app for recording blood pressure measurements.

## Pre-requisites

The application currently requires JDK 1.8 to build. If you already have JDK 1.8 installed, skip this step.

**Check if the right JDK is already available**

Run the command `java -version`. If you have the right version of the JDK installed, you should see something like:
```sh
openjdk version "1.8.0_232"
OpenJDK Runtime Environment (AdoptOpenJDK)(build 1.8.0_232-b09)
OpenJDK 64-Bit Server VM (AdoptOpenJDK)(build 25.232-b09, mixed mode)
```

If this command has an error, or shows a different version, you can follow the instructions below to install the JDK.

**Install the JDK**

We recommend using [jEnv](https://www.jenv.be/) to manage your JDK installations. Here are instructions to setup a working JDK 1.8 installation (macOS only):

1. Setup up [Homebrew](https://brew.sh/).

2. Install `jEnv` using Homebrew.
```sh
brew install jenv
```

3. Add the following lines to your shell configuration file (`~/.bash_profile` if you're using bash, or `~/.zshrc` if you're using zsh).
```sh
export PATH="$HOME/.jenv/bin:$PATH"
eval "$(jenv init -)"
```

4. Once this is done, you'll need to restart the terminal or reload the configuration file in order for the `jenv` command to be recognised.
```sh
source <path to shell configuration file>
```

5. Install the JDK using Homebrew.
```sh
brew tap AdoptOpenJDK/openjdk
brew cask install adoptopenjdk8
```

6. Add the installed JDK to `jEnv`
```sh
jenv add /Library/Java/JavaVirtualMachines/adoptopenjdk-8.jdk/Contents/Home
```

7. Run the command `jenv versions`. You should see something like:
```sh
  system
* 1.8
  1.8.0.222
```

## How to build

**Clone the project using git.**

Run the following command in a terminal.

 ```
 $ git clone git@github.com:simpledotorg/simple-android.git
 ```

**Install Android Studio**

Download and install Android Studio from [their website](https://developer.android.com/studio/).

**Import the project into Android Studio.**

When Android Studio starts up, it will prompt you to create a new project or import an existing project. Select the
option to import an existing project, navigate to the `simple-android` directory you cloned earlier, and select it.

When building for the first time, gradle will download all dependencies so it'll take a few minutes to complete.
Subsequent builds will be faster.

## Running locally

The Simple App can be run locally on an Android emulator using Android Studio. To do this,

**Install the NDK library**

The NDK library is currently required by the project to enable an SQLite extension. To install it:

* Open the SDK Manager through Tools -> SDK Manager
* Select Appearance & Behavior -> System Settings -> Android SDK in the left sidebar
* Select the SDK Tools tab in the main window
* Activate NDK (Side by Side) and click Apply

NDK will now be installed.

**Create a Run/Debug configuration**

* Open the Run/Debug configurations window through Run -> Edit Configurations ([ref](https://developer.android.com/studio/run/rundebugconfig))
* Create a new configuration using the `Android App` template
* Set the module to `app`, and finish creating the configuration

**Create a virtual device**

* Create an Android Virtual Device (AVD) using the AVD Manager, usually found in Tools -> AVD Manager. ([ref](https://developer.android.com/studio/run/managing-avds))
* Select a device and operating system
* Note: You will have to download one of the available OS options the first time you create an AVD

**Set the right build variant**

* Open the Build Variants window through View -> Tool Windows -> Build Variants, or clicking the item in the lower left
  corner of the main window
* Set the Build Variant of the app module to `qaDebug`

**Run the app**

* Click "Run", either through Run -> Run, or the green play button in the top toolbar.

## Code styles

The code styles which the project uses have been exported as an IntelliJ code style XML file and are saved as
`quality/code-style.xml`. To import them into Android Studio,

1. Open the Android Studio preferences page, and navigate to Editor -> Code Style.
1. Click on the gear/settings button next to the "Scheme" label.
1. In the drop-down menu, select "Import scheme".
1. In the file picker, navigate to  `<project>/quality/code-style.xml`.
1. Import the `Simple` scheme into the IDE and set it as the project code style.

## Tooling

An Android Studio plugin that provides some quality of life improvements like live templates can be found [HERE](https://github.com/simpledotorg/simple-android-idea-plugin).

## Build and deploy Simple Server

Simple Server is in a separate repository, and you should follow the [instructions there](https://github.com/simpledotorg/simple-server/blob/master/README.md).

## Resources

Check out the following documents for more information.

* [Quirks That You Should Probably Be Aware Of](doc/QUIRKS.md)
* [More Documentation](doc)
* [Recipes](doc/recipes.md)

Commit message:

Update README to include instructions on building APK with different build variants

README.md, after:

![Build Status](https://github.com/simpledotorg/simple-android/workflows/CI/badge.svg)
[![pullreminders](https://pullreminders.com/badge.svg)](https://pullreminders.com?ref=badge)

# Simple

An Android app for recording blood pressure measurements.

## Pre-requisites

The application currently requires JDK 1.8 to build. If you already have JDK 1.8 installed, skip this step.

**Check if the right JDK is already available**

Run the command `java -version`. If you have the right version of the JDK installed, you should see something like:
```sh
openjdk version "1.8.0_232"
OpenJDK Runtime Environment (AdoptOpenJDK)(build 1.8.0_232-b09)
OpenJDK 64-Bit Server VM (AdoptOpenJDK)(build 25.232-b09, mixed mode)
```

If this command has an error, or shows a different version, you can follow the instructions below to install the JDK.

**Install the JDK**

We recommend using [jEnv](https://www.jenv.be/) to manage your JDK installations. Here are instructions to setup a working JDK 1.8 installation (macOS only):

1. Setup up [Homebrew](https://brew.sh/).

2. Install `jEnv` using Homebrew.
```sh
brew install jenv
```

3. Add the following lines to your shell configuration file (`~/.bash_profile` if you're using bash, or `~/.zshrc` if you're using zsh).
```sh
export PATH="$HOME/.jenv/bin:$PATH"
eval "$(jenv init -)"
```

4. Once this is done, you'll need to restart the terminal or reload the configuration file in order for the `jenv` command to be recognised.
```sh
source <path to shell configuration file>
```

5. Install the JDK using Homebrew.
```sh
brew tap AdoptOpenJDK/openjdk
brew cask install adoptopenjdk8
```

6. Add the installed JDK to `jEnv`
```sh
jenv add /Library/Java/JavaVirtualMachines/adoptopenjdk-8.jdk/Contents/Home
```

7. Run the command `jenv versions`. You should see something like:
```sh
  system
* 1.8
  1.8.0.222
```

## How to build

**Clone the project using git.**

Run the following command in a terminal.

 ```
 $ git clone git@github.com:simpledotorg/simple-android.git
 ```

**Install Android Studio**

Download and install Android Studio from [their website](https://developer.android.com/studio/).

**Import the project into Android Studio.**

When Android Studio starts up, it will prompt you to create a new project or import an existing project. Select the
option to import an existing project, navigate to the `simple-android` directory you cloned earlier, and select it.

When building for the first time, gradle will download all dependencies so it'll take a few minutes to complete.
Subsequent builds will be faster.

## Running locally

The Simple App can be run locally on an Android emulator using Android Studio. To do this,

**Install the NDK library**

The NDK library is currently required by the project to enable an SQLite extension. To install it:

* Open the SDK Manager through Tools -> SDK Manager
* Select Appearance & Behavior -> System Settings -> Android SDK in the left sidebar
* Select the SDK Tools tab in the main window
* Activate NDK (Side by Side) and click Apply

NDK will now be installed.

**Create a Run/Debug configuration**

* Open the Run/Debug configurations window through Run -> Edit Configurations ([ref](https://developer.android.com/studio/run/rundebugconfig))
* Create a new configuration using the `Android App` template
* Set the module to `app`, and finish creating the configuration

**Create a virtual device**

* Create an Android Virtual Device (AVD) using the AVD Manager, usually found in Tools -> AVD Manager. ([ref](https://developer.android.com/studio/run/managing-avds))
* Select a device and operating system
* Note: You will have to download one of the available OS options the first time you create an AVD

**Set the right build variant**

* Open the Build Variants window through View -> Tool Windows -> Build Variants, or clicking the item in the lower left
  corner of the main window
* Set the Build Variant of the app module to `qaDebug`

**Run the app**

* Click "Run", either through Run -> Run, or the green play button in the top toolbar.

## Code styles

The code styles which the project uses have been exported as an IntelliJ code style XML file and are saved as
`quality/code-style.xml`. To import them into Android Studio,

1. Open the Android Studio preferences page, and navigate to Editor -> Code Style.
1. Click on the gear/settings button next to the "Scheme" label.
1. In the drop-down menu, select "Import scheme".
1. In the file picker, navigate to  `<project>/quality/code-style.xml`.
1. Import the `Simple` scheme into the IDE and set it as the project code style.

## Tooling

An Android Studio plugin that provides some quality of life improvements like live templates can be found [HERE](https://github.com/simpledotorg/simple-android-idea-plugin).

## Building an APK with a different build variant

There are currently 2 ways to build an app pointing to different environments:

1. Changing the `qa` API URL in `gradle.properties` file to point to the environment you want. These builds will be debuggable and require us to clone the project and build it using [Android Studio](https://developer.android.com/studio). [*Warning*: These changes should not be commited back to `master` branch]
2. Use Bitrise workflows to build APKs of different build variants. These builds will not be debuggable, unless for `build-debuggable-sandbox-apk`.

## Build and deploy Simple Server

Simple Server is in a separate repository, and you should follow the [instructions there](https://github.com/simpledotorg/simple-server/blob/master/README.md).

## Resources

Check out the following documents for more information.

* [Quirks That You Should Probably Be Aware Of](doc/QUIRKS.md)
* [More Documentation](doc)
* [Recipes](doc/recipes.md)
